Thank you very much. And a very good afternoon, committee, colleagues.
Good to see you all. I'm joined by Commissioner Peter Mercy and
Head of Policy, David Carrigan, here this afternoon, and looking
forward to the opportunity to engage in some questions.
For the past two years, the government has been focused on fixing the basics in
building the future, supporting economic growth, and creating the
conditions for businesses to succeed.
We've taken a number of actions to support that growth, particularly in the
revenue portfolio, and also importantly, to ease the cost of
living pressures. Some of those examples include Investment Boost,
which is encouraging businesses to invest and grow, delivering tax relief
by adjusting the income tax thresholds and Working for Families,
FamilyBoost, helping families with early childhood education
costs. We've made changes and strengthened KiwiSaver by
gradually increasing default employer and employee
contribution rates,
and we've restored interest deductibility, helping increase rental
supply and choice for tenants. Budget 2026 delivers a suite of
tax changes to strengthen the tax system and support investment and make
compliance easier. A couple of headlines.
Research and development tax incentive is being improved by
providing support to businesses sooner, expanding eligibility, and
refining settings to better target high-value activity.
We'll make it easier for businesses to operate by simplifying the fringe benefit
tax rules for motor vehicles. Shareholder loans are being
strengthened to protect tax integrity, and we're continuing to make New Zealand an
attractive destination for skilled migrants, building on earlier
changes to the Foreign Investment Fund regime to reduce compliance costs and
support retention of talent. We've introduced a cap
on donation tax credits to support fairness and the integrity in the
tax system. It's important to note that this doesn't limit anyone's ability to
donate, including those who give more than $100,000 a
year. Advice from IRD and Treasury shows that
99.9% of donors will not be
impacted by these changes. This sits alongside other changes to support the
charitable and not-for-profit sector, including lifting the tax-free
threshold, keeping membership fees non-taxable, and enabling in-year
donation credits. Mr. Chair, lastly, Budget
2026 provides $15 million more per year to strengthen
Inland Revenue's debt compliance work focused on unpaid GST and
PAYE, which makes up just under 60% of tax debt
and is growing faster than other categories.
This investment's expected to get a return of $45 million
annually, a three-to-one return to the Crown.
I'd like to take the opportunity to thank
the great work by IRD and officials in this regard.
Our tax debt is an area of challenge, and it has increased
significantly under the post-COVID period,
but our investment in compliance is now keeping that down.
The measures that I've discussed reflect a disciplined approach to managing the tax
system, supporting growth, and targeting help to those who need it most,
while maintaining strong control and focus on government
spending. With that, Mr. Chair, I'll be happy to take questions.
Thank you. We're going to kick off first up to Deborah Russell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Minister. I want to talk through some of the changes that you
announced in the budget.
I don't especially wish to talk about the non-resident contractors tax exemption
for aircraft engineers. We essentially talked about that during the
budget tax debate, and the same thing with the Working for Families changes.
We went through those as well, and the company loans to shareholders.
So we talked through those quite extensively during the
committee stage of the debate-
Mm-hmm
... which went on for a while.
Number one.
I do want to talk through the others.
Okay.
So the changes to the donation tax credit,
just one question on that, then I want to go to some of the other changes there.
You said 99.9%, or something like that, or whatever, of donors
are not affected by this. But what about of donations?
In regard to the total value aspect?
Yeah.
Well, obviously, the changes that we've announced come in from the 1st of April
2027.
Sure.
So we don't have data
in the context of what will,
you know, exactly.
Yeah.
But based on the hypothetical of
the past, we are aware, as I said, that there's about 350
donors that are-
Yeah
... based on the modeling that the officials have done, would be impacted.
Again, the implication around putting a number on that is
difficult, but I'm happy if David wants to-
So I think it said in the RIS, was it 19 million a year or something
like this?
So the fiscal cost to the Crown of the-
Well, the fiscal
... changes in the region of 52 to 53 million, around that
number over the forecast period.
And it goes up-
So that implies 150 million of donations.
From memory, it goes-
Over the forecast
... like 30 and a half million in the first year, going up to 19 or so.
Yeah.
Happy to be corrected on the numbers, but I'm-
No, that's right.
Pretty sure after-
Okay. So that's about the amount that we're talking about, about 150 of donations
over the forecast period.
Yeah, correct.
Okay. That's all. That's fine. Let's just clarifying that.
It's probably sitting in the RIS and I just need to take notice of it.
But there were some other changes you announced that day, which didn't come through
in the budget night legislation. And so I really want to know when they're
going to appear. So it's the
membership subscriptions and levies for not-for-profits.
Mm.
The change in the threshold there.
And
the other changes announced there. When can we expect that legislation to come out?
Yeah. So,
the cabinet hasn't made final decisions in regard to the
September tax bill at this point. But it would be fair to say that it
is my intent that we would want the changes that we have
included as part of that to be included as part of the September tax
bill that we will be bringing to the House at that point.
But Minister, you've announced it from on April 2027, so that would be nice then.
Yes.
Though a couple of them are from on April 2028.
Yeah.
Look, the same question that
I'm really interested in the fringe benefit tax changes.
So,
I looked at the changes you're making around vehicles,
and they look pretty sensible to me.
So I know there's the compliance cost of the record-keeping there
is
not very nice.
So I was pleased to see those changes.
So again, we're expecting that from 1 April 2027. Is that correct?
So I would-
Yeah.
That's correct. Yeah.
Yeah. So the legislation will hopefully be in the September tax bill, otherwise
we've got trouble on that one.
Yes, that's correct.
Yeah. But the other one I'm really interested in that one is
the change, you didn't talk a lot about it during the
budget announcement. It was mostly focused on the compliance cost stuff, but it's
around the cost base for electric
vehicles compared to the standard default rate.
Can you explain to me what advantage that gives to electric vehicles or what
happens there?
Yeah. So I can give you a high-level overview, and then I'm happy for officials to
give a bit more of a detailed explanation.
But what we're doing in the vehicle space is making an effective
premise of close enough is good enough.
And as you'll be aware of the complexities with FBT, there's a lot of-
Yeah
... compliance on
people to meet the obligations. In regards to the electric vehicle
portion, in particular, the--
And I think some of the commentary that we've seen in the market more broadly is
acknowledging that actually,
as a result of this change, there will be a benefit
that flows through in the way in which organizations
and businesses
will be able to benefit from taking up
electric vehicles over, in effect, fossil fuel
type vehicles, which is obviously positive because
fleets are the largest driver of EV vehicles, and the flow-through of an increased
fleet which are electrified has an ability to provide benefit through
to the secondhand market as it flows through.
In regards to the
tax specifics on that-
So, I'll be honest, I
need to get back with the actual detail.
I suspect it's-
Oh, look, the standard rate is 22.8%, and this is the cost base, and you're
shifting it to 17% for EVs.
So it's that differential between the 22 and the 17 and the justification for that?
It would have been based on the useful life of an electric
vehicle and the cost per year, but I can come back with-
Right
... some detail. And I'm sorry, I can't-
No, that's okay
... I can't give you detail.
I was just-- Because putting your other hat on, Minister,
which we'll talk to you about too, the climate hat.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, one of the things I keep on hearing from
managers of fleets and the like and commercial vehicle fleets is actually they're
interested in EVs, but the cost is a barrier,
the FBT cost. So that's not part of the thinking around this
differential. It's just based on... You'll get back to me, David.
Yeah. I'll-
Yeah
... come back. Sorry. I apologize.
No, that's okay. Sorry to-
No, it's all good. It's all good.
I think one of the areas in tax isn't always a-- Well, it
can, in some areas,
have a beneficial impact in regards to behavior, but the
context here is really looking at, first and foremost, the compliance
cost that the FBT regime places-
Yeah
... upon business, and particularly small business, and the fact that it hasn't
been-
Yeah
... updated for as long as I've been alive and since its
inception as well. So,
actually, that's not factually correct, Chair. I'm sorry. I am older than the FBT.
About five years. So now I'm giving away the cost of my age.
But the short answer is it is complex, and
we've signaled where we want to make further changes-
Yeah
... as well. The reality, as you'll be aware, is the fiscal
costs on that are pretty significant on unrealized benefits.
Mm-hmm.
And really, it's a capacity to be able to
deal with that fiscal trade-off. But that motor vehicles was reasonably
inexpensive and has quite high payback in terms of compliance cost reduction.
No, completely comfortable with that.
So-
Can I just ask a supplement, Deborah?
Yeah.
Just on FBT specifically, what sort of feedback have you had on that close enough
is good enough announcement, through the, I guess, trades
and small business community?
Yeah. I'll give what I've heard, and then I'm happy to, if Peter wants to just give
some feedback around what
IR referred from an operational. But it's definitely a case, FBT
is regularly raised with me as minister as an area
of
compliance cost and burden. And one of the three
expectations that I've set as the Minister of Revenue of the department is, first
and foremost, attract and retain capital, attract and retain talent,
and reduce compliance costs on taxpayers.
And on the underpinning platform around that is utilizing modernization
technology enablement to deliver the services that IR do,
acknowledging the operational independence between the minister and the
commissioner. So yeah, feedback's been very positive around
that direction of travel. The other thing that we've done differently,
and again, opposition members will be aware,
using a generic tax policy process, so not working through
with stakeholders and industry, getting feedback, consulting on
that. Tax at one level should be no surprises in the
context of the policy position, and I think we are in
a position now from a tax policy point of view that
the industry and the IRD are working together constructively around the
points of difference, and we're doing things which have
been well considered and have good degrees of input as well,
which is positive from a tax point of view, because certainty around policy
is a key enablement.
Mm-hmm. Thanks, Deborah.
Okay. Thank you. Another one that you
announced on budget day, it was in the
fact quarto that he's sitting there going, "Oh my God."
That's right.
Is the foreign investment fund changes, so extending the RAM
method to all- Taxpayers. Again, that wasn't in the budget
night legislation, but it's going to apply from 1 April 2026.
So I'm trusting that's going to be in the September tax bill.
Yeah, that's correct.
Okay. Yeah.
And I think
just to remind, this initiative will
expand the access to the revenue account method,
which we made some changes last budget, particularly dealing with
those that are domiciled, particularly in the US, coming into New
Zealand. What we got feedback through, again, quite a lot of consultation
around this is from New Zealand-based
investors, founders, startup tech businesses, which are
therefore expanding their operations offshore, that the
basis to be able to calculate their tax is a benefit.
Again, there's a very high degree of compliance costs in calculating
FIF. And if you stand back around why we do this, the FIF regime is
primarily was brought in as an anti-avoidance mechanism to
ensure that people weren't able to utilize offshore
investments over and above benefit of what a New Zealand domestic
investor could achieve. And so,
whenever we're doing policy in this area, we're weighing up the tax integrity
considerations of protecting the revenue base for New Zealand, but equally
acknowledging
most people nowadays will have potentially a sharesies
account or other account. Potentially they may be trading offshore shares,
and that's okay because that's the way things are.
But we don't want the burden of compliance to overwhelm
the area of the tax integrity and the collection of revenue and getting that
balance right, some of the changes that we've made.
Okay, cool. So last area of questioning for someone else, if that's okay.
The research and development tax incentive.
Now, this is a little bit tricky because yesterday in the
supplementary estimates hearing, I asked why there was
a
$25,000, $25 million reduction
in supplementary estimates in the amount of expenditure on the
R&D tax incentive. And the explanation we were given by Treasury or by
whoever turned up-
It was Treasury, wasn't it? Mm
... was that
there had been, firms were doing less R&D and in an uncertain
climate, that that was a bit of a problem, and that was one of the indicators
there. Today, this morning, in the hearing with the Minister of
Finance, the Minister of Finance gave us a different explanation, which
was that there was
a change in the method of accounting for
software-
Mm-hmm
... with respect to the R&D tax credit.
Mm-hmm.
And we've also got some stuff coming through in the budget night-
Yeah, I can answer that. Yeah
... announcement. So who was correct, or is it a bit of both?
And can you just take us through what this R&D tax incentive is?
Yeah. Well, how about I take you through the policy position and
I'll leave it for you to
do the compare and contrast. But the research and development
tax incentive aspect relates to internal software.
The number that you quoted, around 25 million, is actually
the change that we made reduces the research and
development tax incentive cap on
non-administrative internal software development
expenditure from currently, which is 25 million,
to 3 million per business per year.
So we've changed that threshold. The fiscal impact of
that policy change is in the region of 99
million over the forecasted period.
Okay.
And
so the change does deliver a fiscal savings.
Mm.
And it also maintains accessibility for small and medium enterprises
to get a research and development tax credit, albeit with a smaller cap.
Okay. So the Treasury was wrong and the minister was right.
Well, I'm not one to... I'm just giving you the-
Oh, facts
... brief insight. From a revenue point of view, I wouldn't hear their transcript.
But the software rules for research and development
tax incentive, as you will be aware, are complex-
Mm
...
and are burdensome to administer.
And so when we were considering, and officials were
advising ministers around policy here,
those were some of the considerations that were put into play.
There was other considerations which I'm happy if the officials want to
comment on.
Sure. So as the minister said, software is tricky.
If you think about software that firms develop,
it's always been the case that if it's purely administrative software, like a
payroll system that's specific to that firm, that should never qualify for
an R&D tax credit-
Mm
... because the firm's getting all the benefit out of it, so
they've got reasons to invest in that anyway.
However, there
is internal software that firms can
make and produce that
is a bit more customer-facing. So it's not purely routine,
and that,
before this change, would've qualified for a full R&D tax
credit. It was really difficult to tell the difference.
Mm.
And there was a fiscal risk that
if the cap was too high, that people would be
relabeling
what is actually administrative software, non-administrative software.
So that was the rationale for reducing the cap from 25 million
to 3.
Mm-hmm.
It actually only impacts between 20 and 30
businesses.
Some of them in the financial services sector.
So for the vast majority of businesses, they will still be claiming exactly the
same credit.
Yep. And again, the September tax bill, I take it, that will-
Subject to cabinet decision-making-
Sure
... it is out-
Actually, it was previously the August tax bill, wasn't it?
Something-
Sorry
... if that's okay. It was previously the August tax bill.
It was.
So yeah, okay.
Well-
Just
I'm hoping it's in the house-
Yeah
... before the September 24th, Minister.
I think we can-
I appreciate your appetite for it and I'll- ...
see what I can do
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
We've got a new question from Dan Bidois.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks for coming before us, Minister.
We've noticed in the budget you've got an allocation for greater
compliance activities, I think about 60 million over the forecast period.
Can we get a sense from you, I guess, in the past IRD has
had some recent success with compliance.
How are we going to build on that in this
coming year and the forecast period?
Yeah, absolutely. Thanks for that.
And I'll pass over to Peter to provide a bit more context, because
as Minister of Revenue, this is probably one of my proudest areas of
delivery by the department in the past two and a
half years. And in effect, what you're seeing here is a
post-COVID period, IRD resetting its focus
around the collection of
tax that's owed to the Crown in order to fund public services.
And every dollar that we don't collect that is owed to the Crown, we have
to source from another source, or we have to borrow.
So there's a real big incentive. Tax debt as of March of this
year is sitting at $9.4 billion. I'm excluding the
social taxes.
Mm.
And when in June of '23,
that number was 5.8 billion, so a 62%
change. In 2024, the
increase in debt curve basically peaked, and it has
started to go down. And so what we saw between last year
and this year is the total tax debt has gone from
9.3 billion last year to 9.4 billion this
year. So you've seen, in effect, for the first time in a
long period of time, the flattening of the trajectory of the debt curve,
a bending of that curve, actually, looking at some of the recent
data coming through. And that is a result of the
IRD, in effect, getting back to basics around
enforcement and compliance, and the funding that has been allocated to that
has obviously helped that.
But as anyone would appreciate,
it takes time to rebuild capability and
experience, and I was lucky to be
with IRD in
before 2000. And so in that period, a lot
has changed, but some things haven't.
But one would-- is very much the case that institutional
awareness and understanding of investigators and that compliance and
the softer skills of how to collect-
Mm
... and debt, combined with the way in which technology
is now available, which really plays into the opportunity it has been.
So I think it's
been a really key aspect. Student loan debt for offshore-
Mm
... is also a key area. The department are now utilizing
multiple tools. And of course, though, the department's first avenue
always is to prevent someone going into debt in the first
place. And the tools and mechanisms around
arrangements and payments and stuff has been a key area of focus.
Equally though, one area that's a major focus is organized
crime. And the department work very
closely with police and customs and other
agencies in the area. Because as you will appreciate or may
not,
you will appreciate because I know you do, that organized
crime and the funding, and the funding of organized
crime, the department has tools and
ability to be able to disrupt that, and that
is the core focus as part of that aspect.
Not to disrupt organized crime, but to disrupt taxpayers that are
evading or not paying tax and not meeting the law.
I'm just saying that surprisingly, those type of entities generally
do like to evade and avoid. So
yeah, it's been anything. I don't know, Peter, it's from your assessment?
Just to add a couple of statistics to that.
So
at the moment, 90% of all tax is paid on time.
Importantly, I think over the last 12 months, we've seen an improvement actually in
the GST and PAYE payments that are made on
time. So that's gone up from 94.1% to 94.8.
So it suggests that some of the campaigns we're running up the front end are
actually stopping people from getting into debt.
That helps explain that 2% growth in
the gross debt book we see.
Also, the size of debt that's less than six months old has
also reduced, so that's sitting at about 4.4 billion of that
$9 billion. That compares to 5 billion a year ago.
So that's a combination of the work we're doing up front, encouraging people.
But the
more active element of compliance we've been,
as you know, over the last three years, we've received additional funding for that.
That activity is both in revenue generating the side
of it. So,
for the three years ended March,
from July '24 to March 26, two years, sorry,
we had a target of 1.9 billion, so that included the
amount we were expecting to generate, and we've brought in about
2.7 billion, so quite a bit more.
Mm.
Debt, our target was 7 billion, and we've brought in 7.2.
And with overseas student loan borrowers, the target there was just under
400 million, and it's now 476.
Yeah.
So there's a whole range of activities that have gone into generating that, but
generally, positive response and support from the public,
I think, for that more active
engagement.
Positive news. Thanks, Peter and Minister.
I guess not everybody likes the tax man chasing up debt.
So do you both have any advice for either
businesses or individuals that-
Pay your debt
Yeah, in these circumstances and what they should be doing.
Because we get anecdotal feedback all the time.
"Oh, geez, I'm getting chased up by IRD about this."
Yeah.
So I guess, what advice can you give to them on how
to manage their debt with IRD appropriately?
Oh, I think first and foremost,
and I'm sure across the political divide,
people would agree that the men and women that work for IRD are
considered some of the best
public servants in the context of their capability, experience, and the role in
which they do. And the IRD is one of those departments that
has had that
legacy for a good period of time, and the commissioner and I
regularly discuss to ensure that we're not resting on our laurels
of that position.
And also the fact that it has access to some of the most sensitive taxpayer
data
of any department, and the importance, I think, and again from a bipartisan, of
protecting that
data set on behalf of New Zealand taxpayers.
So,
the key aspect from my point of view as minister
is to ensure that for those taxpayers that are
deliberately looking to evade and not meet the legal
requirements that they are around paying tax, that
the department has the means and mechanisms to ensure that they
are meeting the law and are undertaking the enforcement
activities that are required.
Mm.
The operational independence of the department then progresses and executes that
agenda. But increasing compliance activity, reducing
compliance burden on taxpayer. Because again,
reducing the compliance burden, such as fringe benefit tax, which we talked about
before, may mean that it's simpler to comply and therefore people don't
then inadvertently get into a position of tax debt because of
mechanisms outside of their control.
Increasing de minimis rules,
such as we've done as well, across the board,
have a benefit from a tax integrity point of view of
reduction in risk exposure for tax debt, but equally reduce compliance
costs. So they're both intertwined.
I think one of the areas that's most interesting, and department might want to
comment, is just with the advent of technology, with
AI,
the way in which taxpayers and New Zealanders
are utilizing tools such as that to get
information. The IRD in
particular is very aware of the need to
modernize and to be in a position where it is
able to work and interact with New Zealanders in a way in
which supports the technology they're using.
We used to talk about intermediaries quite a lot in tax, which was sort
of like a tax accountant working with IRD on behalf of clients.
You can fast-forward three years, even in some point current
state today,
a lot of interaction with the department is through AI
agents on behalf of taxpayers. And so the whole
model is changing.
Mm.
IRD are absolutely aware and have active programs to
modernize. But I think it is just a good example of where technology
deployment is coming into play, and IR in
particular probably the front line of some of that technology deployment.
And when you're protecting the revenue base of the Crown, there's obviously
risks and benefits around that, because one of the benefits of
the New Zealand tax system is that it is
reasonably simplistic in the context of other jurisdictions.
Think US, even Australia now with respect to their changes.
And simplicity has a low compliance burden, but equally,
it is
something that we need to-- It's an attractiveness for us in terms of investment
and retention of talent. So...
Thank you.
I just want to-
Oh, sorry.
Oh, sorry. Peter.
No, I was just going to add one other point, too, that
I think in answer to your question in particular, we will often
try and contact
businesses or people if we think they are behind in some way.
The best thing they can do is contact us.
Mm.
And if they do believe that there is an issue, a voluntary
disclosure again is the best way to, I guess, position the conversation.
So,
we're not deliberately trying to catch people out.
We want to help people get it right. I think that's the catchphrase.
And we're trialing all sorts of things.
We recently put in place an agentless
calling process where we'll have an outbound call
that's essentially automatically generated with a targeted message saying,
"Look, it looks like you might be behind on X.
Pop on and have a look at your myIR account."
We ran a pilot of that in December, and we had a 30% response rate.
So we're looking to roll that out, because it's just a nice easy prompt to say,
"Look, there might be something on, just go in and check."
Good. Thank you. We've got a supplementary-
I just want to follow on this because it's
really interesting stuff, all that, but I'm just looking at the
actual budget document.
And in terms of services to manage debt and unfiled
returns, so the
budget natural last year was 147 million,
but in the coming year, it's 127 million.
So this is all fantastic work you're doing, but the
budget has been reduced by $20 million.
Do you think that's going to have an impact?
Or what are you doing to work with that decrease?
I'll start off, and we'll get into it.
As part of the expectation letter that I've sent to-
The commissioner is a heavy focus on uptake and
increasing and accelerating the uptake in the use of technology in order to
undertake the operational service delivery that the
department does. Obviously, transformation, as we all know, was done a while ago.
It seems a long time ago now, and we're in a different generation of
technology, particularly when we talk about AI in that context.
So, a major focus by, an expectation from the minister of
the department around uptake of technology,
and also making it easier for other technology intermediaries
that deal with IR to make it easier to work with IR.
So the department's got quite an active program around
intermediaries as well, which is important.
But nevertheless, it's a 13% reduction in funding.
And so part of that is also about,
during, and you would've seen during the past year, we actually made changes within
the appropriation-
Yeah
... between debt, and that's really us managing our
resources to get the best outcome.
So we've got a bunch of targets, whether it's around revenue generation, debt
reduction, and so on. So during the year, depending on how that's going, we might
end up putting more resource into one part than another.
So, I wouldn't read too much into the line itself in terms of the amount of
effort that will ultimately go in, because it depends on what we find
as we start to do that work, we will ultimately move resource around, which might
have a consequential impact on the appropriation, the
line within the appropriation.
Okay. But even if we look at that Māori category expense,
it's a reduction from 786 million to 771 million, so-
Yeah
... I appreciate all the departments are making baseline savings, but I'm-
Yeah. So some of that reflects time-limited funding.
So for example, we were given some time-limited funding to do some work around when
Family Boost was put into place.
Mm.
And so we knew that was going to tail off.
So some of that is also reflected in the bottom line
that's coming out-
Yeah
... coming out as well.
Okay.
So it's a combination of ups and downs.
The other factor, as you'll be aware, is that actually when
the department improves the compliance
up front, then we actually see that the debt...
You've seen this with the debt curve reducing.
So, more up-front investment that we do, say last year, plays
through to less people getting into debt this year, and therefore less activity
required in order to chase that debt.
So there is a correlation between the timing of
intervention and the flow-through of that in terms of
taxpayer behavior, particularly around unfiled returns,
and around debt that needs to be chased up, and therefore the
resource implications around that.
But don't under-- I'm not saying you do, but there is the
overlay of technology, and maybe the commissioner could give a flavor of what's
happening in the call centers around
the way in which technology's being used to, because time to
answer the call is obviously a key issue with IR historically,
but maybe just some context around-
We love Dave Doblin. Sorry.
Love Dave Doblin.
Quick murmur.
Yeah. As I mentioned, the agentless calling is one
use we're putting technology to. Another one is in our call centers we've
adopted a post-call summarization tool, which is part
of our Gen- the Genesis suite of products.
And,
what we found in the pilot, and what has proved as we've rolled it out, is that,
A, our staff find it really useful, and B,
we've identified basically a 17% reduction in the amount of
time spent on the post-call summary.
So that
post-call summary is really important because it captures the key points that we
came across through the conversation and the key actions that are
required. I can't remember the exact number of minutes, but
it's gone from something like an average of 11 down to nine or something like that.
But it's a 17% improvement. So those sorts of technologies
are really good ways of being able to free up our staff to do what is most
valuable, which is, in that case, talking, picking up the next call or responding
to the next email.
Thanks. Anne, over to you please.
Yeah. Just to sub on that for primary whenever I can. Yeah.
Just on that point in particular, you'll probably be aware with how much
most people in the world hate chatbots and talking to the AI or
generated voices on the phone. Can I just guarantee that that's not something
that's in the immediate future for IR?
So I talked about our agentless phone calls.
That is essentially, sounds like a recorded message, isn't it?
But it's basically saying, "Look, this is a recorded message that's just reminding
you, you might want to pop on and check."
Mm-hmm.
But when someone phones us, no, we have real people on the end of the phone
answering those questions.
And there's no intention through the kind of transformation plans that are being-
I don't know what the future holds, but no, we don't have a program
in place at the moment looking to replace our
phone call-
Okay
... responses with something else.
Okay. We'll take that as hopefully that's not in the foreseeable future.
Further to that point, and the application of AI,
and I guess the real privacy potential implications-
Yeah
... and the kind of data sovereignty point, I was exploring this with Treasury, and
with the Minister of Finance earlier.
I guess what guarantees can you give us that this data
will stay in the country?
Yeah.
Yeah. What kind of rule are you running on the processes?
So we take, and obviously tax secrecy is-
Yep
... primacy for us. So when we look at any
AI product, the first thing we do is we'll test it within our sandbox.
Mm-hmm.
And part of that testing includes what data it's going to draw, and where that data
will go.
Mm-hmm.
The
AI that we deploy is within our sandbox.
So the stuff that we have within the organization that is drawing on organization
data stays within the organization and cannot go out.
Okay.
So for example, we have deployed Copilot,
across most of the organization, but there are two
boxes you can go in. One goes to the worldwide web, and you can ask it
general questions.
What's the tax rate in the UK?
Yeah
But the moment you want to use any data that is held by Inland Revenue,
you have to come inside the tent and you can't
then go out again with that piece of information.
So we take that really seriously, and anything that we are
looking to put in production must have gone through both a
security check and a governance check to make sure that the data is secure
and
our people are trained on how to use it.
And just to confirm, is that all happening in-house or is that through the
Parliamentary Services Commissioner? Where is the line?
What is the-
Yeah. So, that work we do in-house.
There are times when we will work with a third-party provider.
So,
obviously when we make changes to
the tech system to start,
we
do testing, and the design of those testing scenarios
can be quite intensive. And that's a product that we've outsourced,
but we've worked with that outsourced provider to
adopt AI. So AI now writes the first run of those test
scenarios, which a human then checks.
That's improved the efficiency by almost 90%.
Oh, yeah.
That doesn't draw on Inland Revenue data.
So, for those things that we are deploying internally, we will
test and determine internally and then share that knowledge with other
agencies.
I referred to the call summarization product.
We've been talking to ACC because they're on the same platform and use the same
tool.
But we will also work with third-party providers on products that will help us as
well, and will help customers.
Just a new line of primary questioning through the Chair.
Minister, do the so-called tax minimization practices of the
big tech companies who are currently making hundreds of millions of dollars off the
back of New Zealanders, do those tax minimization practices concern you?
So, the role of the Minister of Revenue is to ensure that the tax
policy that is set in regards to taxpayers and New
Zealanders, align with expectations and is
doing the job, which is the collection of revenue and protecting the underlying tax
base. In regards to the way in which the department
deals with the
enforcement activities of different types of customers, including large
significant enterprises such as you're referring to, that is an operational matter.
I'm happy for the commissioner maybe to set up context around what activities
are underway in that significant enterprise area around perceived
avoidance and evasion, which is, I think what your question is.
Yeah. So certainly, we
take anything to do with avoidance and evasion very seriously.
I think what you're referring to is more
where firms are domiciled offshore.
And look, we are actively working with international
counterparts, the likes of the OECD work, around as a
complete system, how do we tackle that challenge?
Because it's very difficult for any individual sovereign state to resolve that, and
that's certainly what we're seeing around the world.
So,
we will work to ensure that
companies that operate within New Zealand meet New Zealand's legal
requirements. But there are some issues which are best dealt with at that
multilateral level, and we'll continue to sort of work on that from a policy
perspective.
Yeah, those practices that you are referring to are that currently
local subsidiaries of these massive multinational companies are
paying service or license fees to their own offshore subsidiaries.
Can I just confirm, Minister, is this something that concerns you?
What concerns me is that irrespective of whether you're
an individual taxpayer doing an Airbnb from home
or you're a multinational company,
you should,
at any area of that spectrum, be meeting
your tax obligations in accordance with the law.
And if
anyone along that spectrum
are not meeting their legal obligations, and are evading and avoiding law,
then they should, and will be,
getting a call and a visit, an interaction with the department
because that's an erosion of the tax base in New Zealand.
So, if there are instances where taxpayers
are doing that, to your point,
then I would be concerned about that.
But I am all equally confident, based on the assurances that the
department give me, that their program of compliance
activity covers all spectrums, from significant enterprises down
to individuals and everything in between.
The area around the way in which
companies do move profits between
jurisdictions is one in which is
complex, however, is
well understood in the context of how those firms
do so, and I think it'd be fair to say that those entities that are
operating in an international area will be
very aware of what the rules are. The challenge, I think here,
is that the points of difference between, say, the New Zealand system
and other jurisdictions, and particularly where we don't have a double
tax agreement in play, that's where we can get
some aspects of challenge. And likewise,
other jurisdictions are equally trying to protect their revenue base.
And you see this with other jurisdictions.
That's why the OECD, a bit like climate change COP, but it's a
tax version of that,
is
a negotiation, but it's a consensus position around
tax and where it lies, and everyone's fighting for
protecting their base.
But New Zealand sits at that table alongside our colleagues, particularly Australia
and Canada and other like-mindeds, and fights for
what we believe is right.
There's been a very compelling case made by the likes of Tax Justice Aotearoa that
it's not only entirely consistent with, but actually is stipulated in the
New Zealand/US double taxation agreement for us to, for example, apply the
5% withholding rate to what could be considered royalties in the sense
of those servicing fees and licensing fees.
Has that at all been something that's been investigated by the IRD?
I think
that starts to become an operational question about how and where we can
identify something as a royalty-
Mm
... as opposed to other forms of payment.
So
, as the minister's already implied, we
will enforce the law.
But aspects like those sorts of questions are questions that are
very specific to individual cases, and
we're driven by, if you like, the interpretation of the law
as it relates to that individual circumstance.
There is,
in the situations where a
New Zealand subsidiary is paying a license fee or a service
fee back to its parent,
everything else being equal, that fee will be deductible to the
subsidiary, which will reduce their profits.
The real question for us,
aside from working out whether it's a royalty or not, because that is a legitimate
question. The real question for us is,
is the price that's being charged an arm's length price?
Is it one that a third party would
pay in the market? And that's a transfer pricing question, and
we're pretty good at transfer pricing here in New Zealand.
We've got quite good expertise. So
our people would be looking to see whether that service fee was a market price, an
arm's length price.
Which is how-
And it's always a
conversation between us and the taxpayer.
Can I just clarify?
The point I think you're getting to is, from
my point of view and from government's point of view, I don't care who you are or
what you are or where you are in the context of that, there is no safe harbor if
you're not complying with the law in regards to tax, big or small.
Everyone is within the net, and my expectation
is one of which we enforce the law equally, no matter where
you sit. So there's no safe harbor for any players in this
conversation, and the department exercises its
integrity in the way in which it undertakes enforcement, from organized crime to
individuals, to whatever, in a way in which is aligned to its
objectives, which is collection of revenue for the Crown, doing so
in a way in which is economic and feasible in that context and other
ranges. But there's no safe harbor for anyone in this game.
And part of the reset around compliance funding is to reset
that actually, if you're not meeting your obligations,
then you shouldn't think that it's a free lunch in the context
of that. You will be getting contacted by IR,
and your expectation is you should be complying with the law.
And 90-plus percent of New Zealanders
comply. We're talking about that sliver that don't,
and those ones are the focus of where government have set expectations very
clearly.
I-
Okay. We've got-
Just-
Last sup then.
Yeah. Just, I guess, to reflect back what I'm hearing, just the point I'm
trying to pass through, the arm's length pricing, that becomes incredibly
difficult in the context of vertical integration and oligopoly behavior.
But anyway,
I guess, Minister,
what I'm hearing from officials is particularly the point that there is some level
of ambiguity and there is a lot of technical work that has to be
done to discern whether this constitutes
revenue or a royalty or whatever we want to call it.
And there are plenty of times when government has come in and made the requisite
political decision to provide that clarity, which is why I asked you initially
the point, because this is a matter of policy priority and policy.
If you are to genuinely believe that point that you were making before about the
equivalence between the little guy and the big guy,
why have you not contemplated giving direction to
IRD or progressing policy work or legislative change
to make it clear that you will either apply that 5% withholding rate
to the practices of these big tech companies or look at alternatives?
Yeah. So,
the operational independence between the Minister of Revenue and the IRD
is very clear, is that the policy
decision around tax policy and the drafting of that
legislation, the policy decisions,
lies with the minister, and-
That's my point
... the operational delivery of that tax legislation
to taxpayers is the obligation of the IRD.
I can't direct IRD to focus on this group of
people over that group. That is not within the bounds.
But what I can do is, where we are made aware of
potentially areas of gaps in the legislation
that may not be aligned with the expectations or
objectives of the government, then we will do.
And we do a large number of remedial changes in every tax bill
around, based on feedback that we get from stakeholders
across the country. So, I guess the message here is
if there's an area of perceived weakness within the legislation in
regards to a specific area, then that's something that should be,
and would be welcomed by IR from a policy point of view to take a look at.
And we do so with a wide range of stakeholders.
My point was whether you-
Sorry
... as the minister will do it.
We're going to go to two new sups. We've got a sup from David, and then a sup from
Tom on the same issue. So-
May I come back to that too?
David Wilson.
Okay.
So I've been made aware of what you might call an
anti-competitive practice.
And we're all in supposition now, but we have two
related things. One's as loan to shareholders, as the other is
donations to charitable purposes.
And you can start to draw the threads together here.
So we can loan to company A, loans to shareholder
B,
who then donates money to charitable
purpose, who then provides finance to
company A.
Along the way, there's a refund,
and at one point in that, the charitable purpose
does not pay any tax.
And essentially, you're under-capitalizing the business
practice so that you can keep your margins slim.
So- It's come to my notice, I'm not sure how we
address this, and I'm not sure whether or not you can
address that. But I'd be interested to know how you would.
I love the fact that we're sort of workshopping different tax structuring
ideas- ... that you read right off.
It's probably not the basis of the-
It's pretty serious for the people that are involved
... thing, but there is a mechanism,
one I can't speak on behalf of whether I are
aware or not of these type of things, which we wouldn't necessarily
be talking about here. But the first and foremost is, as and where we are
aware of an instance or a practice that is not in
accordance with the law, or people have questions of whether it's lawful or not,
IRD do have very clear mechanisms and channels in order to
receive such information, and will
consider that.
Mm-hmm.
And likewise, any member of parliament can write
to the Minister of Revenue, on behalf of the constituent or
such,
around a matter, and I would pass that correspondence on to the department.
So I'd suggest,
Dr. Wilson, that probably would be the most appropriate avenue for that
scenario. Just to give you comfort that maybe either that's
either under consideration,
is aware of, or if that's not the case, then what
pathway forward is. But let's stand back and look at it. This is about fairness.
Yes.
And we do not want a position where
people are not complying with the law and taking actions in
regards to that which aren't aligned with that.
That's not right, that's not fair, and we want to make sure that dealing with it.
Thank you.
Secretary Todd.
Mine, and probably this is for Peter or David, just to go back to this
multinationals and whether they're technology companies or other multinationals,
and you touched on transfer pricing, but it's probably worth just teasing it out a
little bit. Because those companies take their obligations pretty seriously, and
you touched on it, but it's probably worth expanding on.
They actually have a dialogue with you quite often-
Yeah
... to make sure they are meeting the obligations.
They're not just off doing stuff in isolation and not having those
discussions. Right? And you touched on taxpayers having a dialogue.
No.
We are pretty active in that space.
Yeah.
Can we just give a bit of context around some of the stakeholder mechanisms
that you have in place to deal with different groups of taxpayers to
get feedback and concerns more formally, because...
Yeah. So,
we
have regular meetings with the corporate taxpayers group, where they
raise issues on behalf of their members.
We
talk a lot to
CAMS,
Tax Justice Network, we talk quarterly, I think.
And various stakeholders have basically got a line into us.
So, we're doing a lot of engagement.
Mm.
And that's just from a sort of policy perspective.
They'll identify, for example, remedial changes that they want.
We'll consider those. We'll
get intelligence like Dr. Wilson
mentioned, and we'll look at that, see whether there's something going wrong with
the tax system.
And as you know, we have at least two bills
a year where we fix up a lot of this stuff as part of remedial
changes. So,
that's kind of a little bit of the flavor of how we do it.
Yeah. I think as Peter said and the minister said, regardless if you're a big
taxpayer or a little taxpayer-
Yeah
... you're actually having individual conversations with taxpayers-
... about their obligations to make sure that they are doing that.
Yeah.
Yeah, and it's important to reinforce again that the
vast majority, virtually all taxpayers in New Zealand, big or
small, comply with their legal obligations.
We are talking about a small slither that do not,
and those are the ones that enforcement and compliance activities is focused upon.
We've got a final set from Barbara here, Congress.
So given now we're just sort of talking about offshore
multinationals and who obviously raise revenue
in the country. Minister, last year you discharged the Digital
Services Tax Bill,
and at the time you said because you were uncomfortable with the
progress by the OECD and other countries.
Can you give us an update on how those discussions are happening?
And has there been any progress since last year?
Yeah, happy to do so. And I think,
remember, we're aware that
process and progress at an OECD level is-
Glacial
... is at a pace at which is not always the pace at which we would
all want or desire. It has its own cadence, which is generally
slower. And that's because of the fact that getting a
consensus decision amongst 195 countries is challenging and complex
at best. But,
David, I don't know if you want to give us the latest on the OECD conversations
around-
Yeah
... Pillar Two and Pillar Three.
So Pillar Two, which is the global minimum tax,
that has made reasonably good progress.
Many countries have adopted that, and the idea there is that it
basically provides an incentive for countries to ensure that
their company tax has an effective rate of at least
15%.
So that's been adopted. There were
discussions with the US on that, and
there is an exception that's been made to the US,
because they've already got domestic rules that essentially
roughly do the same thing. So the
OECD got comfortable that their rules were in line.
Digital service tax.
So on the Pillar One, which is
basically the issue of
often big tech companies not having permanent
establishments in the countries in which they operate, and as a result,
those market countries
potentially raise less tax revenue.
It is fair to say that Pillar One, the multilateral approach,
has stalled I think that's pretty public knowledge.
Mm.
Hopefully, it will kick off again.
A multilateral solution here is always going to be better than each country doing
its own thing. If each country does its own thing-
Just get arbitrage
... you end up with a cottage industry of taxes, you get double
taxation happening and a lot of disputes.
So we still are of the view that the multilateral solution is better,
but I'm being honest,
the pillar one multilateral discussions have stalled.
Thank you.
And just-
Sorry, just on-
Have we put pillar two in place here, David?
Sorry?
Have we put pillar two here?
Yeah, two. Yeah.
And it is in place.
We did. We did.
Minister just wants to say something.
Yeah, I was just going to say, one of the areas just off the back of that, Barbara,
is that the department acknowledging the multilateral as the ideal solution
are equally stepping up efforts to work with like-minded, if you think
Australia and Canada, who we generally form a pretty
strong consensus around. And so in the background, in addition to that,
there's also a second line of active dialogue around
how do like-minded do that, and that's something that we've talked about
because no progress isn't necessarily a satisfactory.
We've equally got to be realistic about how quickly these international things, so
is there things and actions we can take?
And IRD has always been,
and continue, as well-respected on that stage, and so that work's
underway as well.
Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you. All right. We've got Nancy Lu.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Minister, for appearing before us.
I have two questions that are interrelated with each other.
So my takeaway from Budget 2026 is that
you, as the Minister for Revenue, is focused on providing
simpler tax system for everyday New Zealanders, particularly, for example,
95% of the small businesses. So it's easier, it's
less technical tax,
and reducing the compliance cost and make it easier for people
to get along, and to growing and hiring and serving customers.
So my question is,
what are some of the te- you talked about the FBT, but what are some of the
other compliance reducing cost
that you're implementing, and any further opportunities that you can make the
tax system simpler and easier
for our day-to-day New Zealanders? And then I have a second question. Thank you.
Yeah, no problem. So look, Budget '26 had a range of
initiatives in the tax space, which are primarily focused on the
objectives that I outlined at the start.
And we've talked about a few of them today, but a couple that we
haven't touched on, which I think is useful to raise, is that
we did also make some changes around financial arrangement
rules and amendments to support new migrants.
Again, it links back to that core pillar of attracting
talent and attracting capital. We did some
changes in terms of increase to the in-work tax credit in
response to the Middle East situation, which was
timely. We've talked about the non-resident contractor tax
modernization. It'd be fair to say we receive a lot of feedback
from businesses across the board of the compliance costs
and the challenges around that. We made some changes in regards to aircraft,
which anecdotally, from feedback from Air New Zealand and the
public space has been positive,
which is good because that's a challenging area, but equally the compliance
cost of that tax was creating cost that exceeded
benefit.
I think thin capitalization changes for
foreign-owned New Zealand banking groups was equally an
area. So that, what we did there was align some of the regulatory
changes that the Reserve Bank did with the tax treatment, so we've got
consistency in that area. That's actually a revenue
gain to the government as a result of that change.
But again, it just was an effective gap of a
mismatch of the two models.
And I guess we haven't touched on too much, but we have done a lot of the
changes around the Working for Families.
We talked a lot of that through select committee when we passed the bill, but
just information sharing is around customs as well
with the Working for Families. Just acknowledging that the better that government
agencies can talk to each other, the less administrative burden
they have to place on New Zealand taxpayers and consumers, and therefore,
that's a positive both in terms of cost and
compliance, but also just their ability to get the right information to the right
people.
Thank you, Minister. You talked earlier about
the Australia tax system and what's happening in Australia,
and so I just have to ask. Have you
thought about introducing new taxes, like the capital gains tax or the
wealth tax, something in New Zealand to increase tax revenue?
Or do you think that the tax system that we have right now
and-
Okay
...
the funding that we have in New Zealand is capable of providing public
service for New Zealanders without additional taxes?
Yeah, thanks for the question-
You've answered all, Nancy
... Nancy. I mean-
It's my question
... I don't often like to disappoint you, but I am going to in this case,
and I will clarify and confirm that we won't be looking to introduce any
of those taxes. I think it's what's been interesting in the Australian context is
that,
and there are learnings from that in this context and the
Sharesies example of young people having a Sharesies, and
Sharesies is a New Zealand, but I'm just using that as
a proxy, and the obligations and implications
around potentially capital gains tax being applied to
young people who have got overseas couple of Rocket Lab shares or whatever,
it starts to go crikey. And I think that was the kickback around
that. Again,
it shows, and I just stand back, the New Zealand
way in which we do tax policy in New Zealand is very different to
Australia. They have a lot of policies that they
announce but aren't legislated for years.
Mm. Yeah.
Right?
Yeah.
Whereas here, we do a lot of upfront work around policy-
And then we pass the law, and it's effective straight away.
So the certainty and the investment certainty, and I guess this
is cross-political spectrum, is a key pillar of tax policy in that
area. And I think our focus as a government is the
three areas that I've outlined: attracting and retaining capital, attracting and
retaining capital,
and reducing the compliance burden on taxpayers.
And all of those three elements
support and underpin the fiscal management approach
and the underlying focus on economic growth as well.
And those are obviously key government priorities.
So the tax system does have some influence in that area. It's one lever.
But one of the aspects that we've acknowledged is that the more we can
simplify our tax system, the easier it is to apply and
to interact with, the more attractive we are as
a place to live, work, raise a family, and retire.
And that's what we want.
Thank you, Minister.
Supplementary, Chloe Swarbrick.
Minister, could you tell us the difference between a tax and a levy?
Well, the department don't-
Differentiate
... we don't deal with levies in this context.
I'm not sure if that question's in scope.
Not in scope. I'm asking-
We deal with tax at the IRD. So the taxes are outlined within the tax
legislation.
Levies are generally covered by customs, which is another ministerial cross.
Thank you. We've got a new primary from Tom Rutherford. Great. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I want to ask about the Foreign Investment Fund.
Thanks.
I'm keen to firstly get a greater understanding of the
changes that were announced in the rules as part of this
year's budget for New Zealand investors.
Yeah, absolutely. So, we made a number of changes around Foreign Investment
Fund, and for those that aren't watching Argentina play football at the
moment and are listening into this, I'm sure this will be a key
area of focus. But the changes
that
we've made in effect
have led to a perception that
domestic investment is
less attractive than international investment.
And the key aspect here is that we want New Zealand
residents who are able to invest overseas to be able to do so without
incurring unnecessary compliance burden as a result of that.
The changes that we've made,
basically one aspect of them relates
to the de minimis rule, which is the amount of
investment that a New Zealand tax resident can make in an overseas
jurisdiction. So we've increased that from 50,000 up to 100,000.
And it'd be fair to say that particularly returning Kiwis or Kiwis that are
operating will build up portfolios potentially over time.
You spend five years overseas, it's not uncommon to have an investment
fund, but the compliance costs of annually doing a tax return
to account for the maybe $1,000, $2,000, or
$3,000 of revenue related to that could be twice that in
compliance costs for tax advisors to do that.
That's simply
an unnecessary compliance cost and an uneconomic burden on the department
equally as well. So those are some of the things that we've changed.
We've also
outlined that we're going to make some amendments around
making sure that the
tax barriers
related to
the fifth rules that may deter people with skills and capital that
we do want in New Zealand
are not of a burden that says actually New Zealand's too much of a
tax compliance headache for us to move there versus another choice.
Middle East conflict's a good example, where, as a result of that, New Zealand
is seen as more of an attractive place to reside because of other factors,
and we have to protect that. But equally, we need to make sure that we are
attractive. The slip side is the area that's concerned is actually
for
Kiwis that have built a business here in New Zealand, and
often in the area of technology startups and innovation, we know there's
a wide range. When the business gets of significant
size and scale, and particularly it operates
in jurisdictions such as the US where it has a presence there, the tax rules
can become a deterrence for actually remaining
tax resident in New Zealand.
And that's a concern for us because we don't want to lose
that talent, and we don't want to lose that tax revenue that's part of the New
Zealand tax system to another jurisdiction.
And often, other countries are trying to attract those
individuals with different settings.
We're not going to outpay or outbeat certain
jurisdictions around
what they offer. But what we can do is ensure that our tax
policy settings in regards to that are at least
competitive and are considered appropriate.
And in areas of the Foreign Investment Fund, which is a complex and technical area
of tax, even for tax professionals to administer.
We've
engaged with the industry deeply.
We've been meeting with the industry-
Over the last two years
... over the nearly two years, getting feedback, getting understanding, and made
what I think is pragmatic policy
changes to reduce that burden.
It's time filling. Yeah. That's your input in response to a patsy.
Well, it's firstly not a patsy and a prime
I mean, the minister does it very well, but it is time filling and- It did come
from-
So not time filling
... a serious question.
Are there serious questions, Deborah?
I asked a question. Oh, yeah. I asked the first question-
Okay
... Minister. Throw that. I've got a question. Throw that.
I've got a supplementary.
Fortunatly. Throw that.
Let him finish his supplementary, please. Thank you.
Oh, okay.
Minister, what about the changes that were made last year for
migrants, and how do the changes-
Oh, for goodness sakes.
Excuse me, I don't make them agree when you ask a question.
That's why I ask the questions, Tom.
Well, fair thing. You've asked a few.
You seem rude.
You've only got half an hour to go.
That is just rude
I'll ask David just to give you a- Sure ... quick update on where that's at.
So,
the changes we made,
last- The minister- Not this budget, but the one before, they were essentially
directed at
migrants generally, but a lot to do with migrants
coming from the US. Next question.
And what was happening was the US taxes its
citizens on a citizenship basis.
Sorry, members, please, if this is disruptive. We've got 25 minutes to go.
I'm coming back to you soon. You've had twice the time allocation.
Can you please bear with us a little?
Show some respect. Yeah. Yeah. So-
Yes. So, what was happening for the US migrants coming to New Zealand was
there were situations where the US would still tax them because they tax on a
citizenship basis,
and we would tax them because they're a resident of New Zealand,
and the double tax agreement didn't solve the problem, so you had double taxation,
and that was putting off
US migrants coming to live in New Zealand.
So what we did in the last budget, not this one, the one before, was we
changed the method that they can calculate their tax, which allowed them to get a
credit in the US against their US tax liability.
Good.
And we consulted on that with the private sector.
So that was the main change we did. Not in this budget, but the one before.
Thank you. Thank you. Quick supplementary, Dr. J.
Oh, sorry, no.
Finally we'll go-
Thanks
... and come back to you.
Okay, so a new question. So the standard estimates questionnaire,
question 14, IR identifies that from the significant
risks relating to your vote, one of them is capability and capacity
of the workforce. And then when you go to question 15, you
also say you don't have a specific fiscal risk,
but you do say that the general fiscal risk for IR relates to your baseline
reductions. So if you look at your baseline reductions from budget
last year, that was the 2%, so that was totalling
63.2 million. IR said that it wouldn't affect, have no
impact to service delivery from that initial 2% savings.
You now have to, are required, to see savings of
197.1 million, which is the 10% from
'27, '28, '28, '29.
What does your early planning look like in
relation to that, given that you've identified those two particular
risks, one to capability, two as to reductions?
How are you dealing with that, and can you commit to that there'll be no changes to
service delivery as a result of those reductions?
Yeah, Barbara, can you just clarify, question 14 and 15?
Because I'm just looking at-
From the standard estimates questionnaire.
Yes. So if question 14 is programs and projects delayed in
'26, '27, Financial Year-
That one.
No.
Must be supplementary.
Oh, yes. Yeah.
The first lot that went out.
No, great. Okay, I'll get Peter to cover that. No.
Yeah. So it's very early. We haven't done the
planning for those future-
The 10%?
Yeah. We haven't done the planning for that. We're about to start doing that.
So, I can't give
you a sense for what the choices are yet as we work our way through that,
but that's the next phase of work for us.
So when would you start working on it, given that it's quite a significant
reduction-
Yeah. Yeah, so-
... in the baseline and the risks that you've identified?
Yeah. So we'll start as a senior team.
We'll start having those conversations in the next three or four weeks, but it will
take a bit of time to work through because I think the key thing will be working
out what our choices are. There'll be some investment options we have which might
have positive outcomes. There's obviously some conversations we'll need to have
with the minister and the Minister of Finance about what those will look like.
So, there'll be a bunch of scenarios, but exactly how that
all lands, it's too early to say at the moment.
So then maybe specifically for the minister.
Minister, do you expect them to keep the level of
service delivery despite reductions in baseline?
Well, the-
Or will there be any front-line service cuts?
Look, my expectations of the department are outlined in my letter of
expectations to the department, which outlines the areas of priority.
The way in which those expectations are operationalized is
operationally independent from the minister.
But as I've outlined, the priorities around reducing compliance costs on
taxpayers, utilization, modernization of technology, and
the delivery of enforcement and compliance activities is all core
areas of departmental delivery, which is in my expectation
letter.
That's fine.
Thank you. Chloe Swarbrick.
Yeah. So you alluded to-
In the primary, right?
Yeah
... earlier the point around meeting with, I think, Tax Justice Aotearoa every
quarter. Is that correct?
Yeah.
So my understanding is that their Big Tech Little Tax report came out in August
2025. That would mean that you've met with them two, three,
possibly even four times since that report came out.
At least twice, I think.
Okay.
Yeah.
I also annoyed you about this last hearing that we had.
So I guess just to return back to that line of questioning earlier,
are you guys saying that you actually haven't done any work on the withholding tax
rate being applied to those service and licensing fees since then, including
with having had those meetings with Tax Justice Aotearoa, who I know have been
arguing for this?
So one of the mechanisms that is clearly signaled is, is we
do publish a tax and social policy work program which
outlines the ministerial areas of focus for the
department around policy, and action around that.
So,
I think it's
a little bit unreasonable to
cite the... The department undertakes policy work in the areas of which
is outlined through that program.
We do meet, and I also equally meet with a wide range of these
stakeholders. Generally, I'm happy to come back to you around dates and
that around the specific group, because I don't remember the specific
conversations with them. But it'd be fair to
say that we do so in good faith around policy, and as a
result of the work that we've done around remedial changes, and I think maybe the
department could Give us how many remedials were there at the beginning of
this term versus what they are now.
But it's about 80 now, and we've pushed through-
A lot
... a lot of remedial changes in that time.
Yeah. Respectfully, Minister, this was the point that I was getting to earlier,
because I see that there's this constant passing of the buck, and I don't at all
blame officials for this, where you were saying that it's an operational decision
as to whether they investigate the application of this withholding tax rate under
the law. But then you're also making the point, which was my entire point, that you
actually have the ability to set policy and to change the law. So I come back.
If you can very plainly please answer my question.
Do you think that it is unfair that the big tax
companies are currently engaged in behavior that most normal people, and
what expert evidence demonstrates, is quite probable
tax minimization if not avoidance behavior?
Yeah. So I don't have a view on whether it's fair or unfair.
What I have a view on is, is it compliant with the law or not?
It is.
And is the law aligned with the
expectations that it is being set, and is that being enforced
appropriately? You're talking about an area of specific policy regarding
a specific taxpayer group.
I don't have a specific view either way around that.
The department's outlined to you that they are undertaking enforcement activity
as part of what they do in their operational sense.
We receive feedback from a wide range of stakeholders on policy ideas.
We don't progress all of those, obviously, because of constraints of
time. But we are working our way through a large area of
tax reform policy.
Happy to come back to you specifically around that point, around where we are
at around consideration or not of that point, and its
priority. It's just I don't have that information in front of me.
Respectfully, Minister, you said it before, and I literally wrote it down, so
you've just contradicted yourself that this is or is not about fairness.
You said earlier, quote, "This is about fairness," end quote.
So how do you think that it could or should be perceived by New Zealanders that
right now we have the IRD chasing those who have loans
for small businesses
who are in arrears or
student loan holders as opposed to multinational tech companies?
The IRD has an obligation to undertake compliance
activities where activities are not in accordance with the New Zealand law, and
the point that you are raising-
Is that you set the law
... is a question of policy, and the policy position in
regards to that, and whether we've made a decision to
change the policy and therefore change the law, which
then, in effect, would enable the IRD to undertake an activity
or not. We're not at that point. I'm signaling to you that
from a point of process, I am happy to come back
around that specific area of policy and give you some feedback.
Happy to work with you around that and get some context and
understanding. There's no issue around that.
It's just the IRD are enforcing the current law,
and
it is what it is.
Thank you. Okay. We're going to go to David Wilson.
Slightly easier question than the last one.
Really pleased to see the increase in KiwiSaver that you're handling through all of
the accounts and so on, and great that you actually do the calculation for me.
Thank you,
and for possibly Barbara's dad.
But the one thing that I'm really interested in is, are we seeing
tradies, sole traders, and small business owners
connecting with KiwiSaver, or are they just kind of not-
Yeah. I'll give a high level and then the department can give you some
context. Increasing contribution rates
is an important area of policy focus for this government.
I think it's an important area of positioning from a bipartisan point of view,
that KiwiSaver is a mechanism, and a strong mechanism, that has
been well supported in the context of increasing
personal savings. Increasing the contribution rates, employer
and employee, to better align with the Australian numbers
has been an area, and doing so in a mechanism that is over time
has equally been an area of focus. We do know that there are areas
of gap in the context of
the KiwiSaver and those that contribute.
Sole traders and business owners are definitely an area.
We equally can see that
young people are also, in the statistics, an
area which are seeing not as high a degree
of input versus others, and that's probably for a whole range of reasons, but it is
one group. And the other aspect is-
Women
... women at retirement age in the context of retirement savings versus
men because of the
maternity leave considerations and that.
So those are probably the three areas of, if you look at where KiwiSaver
is at.
Our focus is on contribution rates to increase the size of the Kiwi Save
fund, but equally acknowledge that the single biggest fiscal
liability that the Crown balance sheet faces in the
future for,
and I'll take a bit of liberty, my generation and below, is the
sustainability of the New Zealand Super Fund into the future and the
ability to continue to fund it alongside health costs.
And so,
we're not head in the sand to that reality.
I think it is an area of political discussion that we do need to
have, and acknowledge, and work through together, because it will
require
bipartisan support in any of that aspect as it always has.
But the good thing is,
is the change isn't for today. We need to signal a transition of
change to a point in the future which reduces that liability,
and seven people at the moment
for every one retiree. By the time we get to 2050, it'll be two
employees for every one retiree.
17 cents of every tax dollar today goes to pension repayments.
It's going to be tracking up to 30 cents in every dollar collected in tax
goes to pension.
You don't need to be a rocket scientist to work out there's going to be a gap
there, and we have to deal with it
Okay. So,
supplementary there.
My point really is around the tradies or the sole traders and
the small business owners, because they're earning revenue.
Yeah.
And that's the key one, is how do we actually turn that lot around as the
workforce?
And look, we might have to come back to you with some numbers.
Yeah.
I'm not sure what's happening with the trend.
I think the other thing with-
Okay
... sole traders and small businesses is often they will see that as
their superannuation.
Yeah.
They'll be looking to build up a business and-
Yeah
... sell it. So it's quite a complicated story in there.
But I don't have the information to hand exactly.
Yeah. So you haven't seen a trend?
No, I don't think so.
There's a good report by Henry Retirement Commission on that.
Yeah.
All right. Thank you. We're down to the last nine minutes, 10 minutes.
Members, Dr. Deborah Russell.
Thank you. Minister, last year the centerpiece of the budget last year
was the accelerated depreciation of the immediate write-off.
Investment boost.
20%. And we've been waiting to get data on how
well it's been taken up. We've seen the survey, but are we starting to get any
data in as to whether or not businesses are taking it up?
Yeah. So we'll have a position by about 1st of
April of next year, we will be start to have a more definitive
data set. We're obviously getting, as you'll be aware, of the filing and the return
filing.
Yeah.
That there are some returns starting to come through, but
the brunt of the information and the collection of information won't
be available until next year.
Equally, there has been changes in regards to on the
IR10 around
taxpayers will be required to put more information into the return so we can get
better information in regards to this area of
deduction that will be done. The department has
done some surveys.
Yeah.
But as you'll appreciate, surveys are a
indicative signal, but not definitive based on the tax
information collected through the tax returns.
So we are in that phase, to be honest.
Sure.
I appreciate that. It takes time for the actual hard data to come in.
Sorry, what have you put on the IR10?
What's the-
It's an extra box
... extra key point? An extra box that-
Basically, I
think it asks taxpayers,
how much have you claimed Investment Boost?
Oh, right.
Or what assets have you claimed, and how much has Investment Boost been claimed?
So we will start to be getting that information in now for those that are early
filers.
Filers, but-
But it's literally just started.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
So because they have until March next year to-
Yeah
... come to file, we won't actually have the full data set until the
end of that period. So we'll start to see something sooner rather-
Some very small businesses will be filing in July, so.
Yeah.
What I'm interested in from a policy point of view more broadly is, is the
capital deployment across the broader economy and what are the
mechanisms around that capital deployment and how
aspects of tax policies, particularly depreciation, plays
into that
play. That data point is
why that we will have a much better-
Okay
... view of that next year. It'll be quite interesting to see that data.
We're grateful when we get it.
Mm.
I was just thinking, are you picking up any stuff coming through the tax agents
or anything like that if they're asking questions about it, or are they mostly on
top of that?
There's a lot of happy farmers at field days that were-
Well, I would say, yeah
... quite popular. But that may be correlated to, yeah.
I-
The foreign share payer.
Yeah. I just-
Lower prices
... I met with a number of tax agents when I was in
Pirro a couple of weeks ago, actually.
Yeah.
And yeah, it's anecdotal, right?
Sure.
So you've got to be careful around that.
But
first and foremost, the ability to get the upfront depreciation on year
one on a capital asset, a tractor, which might be coming
up to a half a million dollars on the very big ones, is not insignificant.
And so it's definitely what we've heard, again, anecdotally, is, is
that the
decision to bring forward capital investment has
definitely been impacted by the ability to claim an
Investment Boost. Maybe the plan was always to do that, but maybe
it wasn't two to three years away, and they've brought that forward to this year.
Yeah.
So that is positive from a productivity point of view, but also
from a general economic-
Yeah
... growth point of view. The Investment Boost was always to be
targeted at that capital investment play versus, say, a scenario where
you reduce the corporate tax rate.
Mm.
A lot of anecdotal feedback says New Zealand's corporate tax rate is higher than
the OECD average, all of that. As we all know, you've
got to take a blended rate of the, in effect, the Investment Boost
overlay on our corporate rate. And when you take that into account, we actually are
very much-
We're competitive
... in the median point in the OECD around our corporate tax rate.
I'd like to do a quick sup.
Yeah, a quick sup. So the real measure of success for Investment
Boost is not necessarily the bringing forward of capital spend, because then you'll
just have a peak and then it'll drop off.
Yeah.
The actual real criteria for Investment Boost being a success is the
additionality.
Mm-hmm.
Mm.
What is the mechanism that you have to measure the additionality of
spending as a result of Investment Boost, given it won't be till April,
but is there a mechanism the IRD is doing as post-evaluation?
The reality is I don't think there's any
easy way to do what you're suggesting.
Ideally, from an assessment perspective,
that's ideally what you would do. You would either have a control group or you'd
have some base measure, but we don't have the luxury of either of those two.
So it'll actually be very difficult.
But I think international evidence does demonstrate that
partial expensing does result ultimately in faster GDP growth.
So with a combination of what we'll gather through the
IR10s and looking at the broader macroeconomic
changes, which you would expect to see that over a period of a number of
years. Those two will suggest an outcome, but it'll
be almost impossible to measure the additionality, because we don't know
what the counterfactual would've been.
Because Treasury obviously estimate it to be 0.1% per annum
over the next forecast periods.
Yeah.
And the rest of it is fiscal drag, and-
So I think the international evidence was something along the lines of
over 20 years, it results in an increase in the capital stock of
something like 1.6%. That's over 20 years.
The bulk of that apparently occurs in the first five.
Mm.
But actually measuring that is very difficult because it's not like we
capture information about investment intentions
from all of the parties for the next 5 to 10 years.
So we don't know, we can't tell you explicitly
how it's changed. All we can do is measure what's happening and try and infer from
that what differences it's making.
One of the deliberate points around when the policy was designed was
for it to be applicable, in effect, in a broad base.
It applies to everything with very few exceptions.
And the counterfactual to that policy from a simplicity point of
view equally is, well, do you have a point of comparative
basis of
an aspect or a part of the economy that's not under that model?
Yeah, exactly.
And that is just the trade-off element here.
But we do know, and other jurisdictions have heavily
utilized this as a mechanism, particularly through COVID.
You are right, absolutely, that the purpose of this is around
increasing capital investment into businesses to drive underlying
productivity in our economy, and the greater productivity, which is a major
challenge for us,
is something that, in part, can be aided
by increase in capital investment.
The acceleration of that capital investment, even with years and time,
while a timing difference in a tax sense, is equally an important point of view
from an economic point of view as well.
So I don't see that as a negative, bringing forward expenditure,
because we get that immediate productivity gain as soon as that
asset is deployed. And
what we are seeing, and just going to the energy or the climate space just to
finish off, is that
grid-scale battery operation up that was just opened
recently by Contact, again, in public domain,
was a good example of a large-scale capital project
which was on the capital plan for out a
year. But as a result of the remodeling of the fiscals
on investment boost was something that they advised us
brought it
forward in terms of that capital deployment.
And while that's a capital benefit, it equally has quite significant other
economic benefits, such as storage, grid security, and
broader
implications on energy as well. So, that's the point.
If you build a new hydro dam or a new solar farm,
you're also going to be eligible for investment boost, and that's something that
we are doing to positively incentivize any New
Zealand business to deploy capital in a way which helps our
economy.
Thank you, Minister. We have met time. Like I said, thank you for your time.
I've just got one tiny little sup on that.
Yeah. Sorry, Megan, we have met time.
I have to be quiet the whole time.
That's very well.
Thank you, Peter and David as well.
Thank you. Thank you.
It's cool.
We started early.
Fine.
Yeah, we don't- We started early ...
we actually could insist we go where we were-
Very nice
... advised time.
Thanks, mate.
We started six minutes early.
Doesn't matter.
It's a long day.